PEP 748: A Unified TLS API for Python (#3853)
python/peps: peps/pep-0748.rst

PEP: 748
Title: A Unified TLS API for Python
Author: Joop van de Pol <joop.vandepol@trailofbits.com>,
        William Woodruff <william@yossarian.net>

> Sponsor: Alyssa Coghlan <ncoghlan@gmail.com>

Author: Thanks! Sorry for the churn here; I'll follow this and fix any mistakes I've made.

> Sponsor: Alyssa Coghlan <ncoghlan@gmail.com>

Reviewer: All good! Churn doesn't matter, everything is squash merged at the end.

included), “-” (exclude matching ciphers if they were already included, but
allow them to be re-added later if they get included again), and “+” (include
the matching ciphers, but place them at the end of the list), and you get an
extremely complex format to parse. On top of this complexity it should be noted
that the actual result depends on the OpenSSL version, as an OpenSSL cipher
string is valid so long as it contains at least one cipher that OpenSSL
recognizes.

OpenSSL also uses different names for its ciphers than the names used in the
relevant specifications. See the manual page for ``ciphers(1)`` for more
details.

The actual API inside OpenSSL for the cipher string is simple:

.. code-block:: c

    char *cipher_list = <some cipher list>;
    int rc = SSL_CTX_set_cipher_list(context, cipher_list);

This means that any format that is used by this module must be able to be
converted to an OpenSSL cipher string for use with OpenSSL.

Network Framework
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Network Framework is the macOS (10.15+) system TLS library. This library is
substantially more restricted than OpenSSL in many ways, as it has a much more

> restricted class of users. One of these substantial restrictions is in

Reviewer 2: It seems like it would be worth mentioning that Network Framework precludes the implementation of either `TLSBuffer` or `TLSSocket`, since there is no way to parse bytes into or out of a bytes buffer, nor any way to cause `send` and `recv` to block, as the Network Framework versions of those functions take completion handlers and require a CoreFoundation runloop to already be running.

It's a little misleading to even call Network Framework a "system TLS library", which is why it seems "restricted". Personally I find its architecture very annoying, and badly done in a lot of ways, but in its model it considers TLS to be a the same sort of layer for applications as TCP.  In the same way that you can't get raw sockets and then ask the operating system's ethernet driver to assemble connection data from segments in frames with BSD sockets, you cannot ask the operating system's TLS driver to assemble connection data from TCP streams into TLS records for you.

  not, that library version has been unsupported by upstream for nearly one year
  as of the time of writing. The CPython development team has started shipping
  newer OpenSSLs with the Python available from python.org, but this has the
  same problem as with Windows.

* Users may wish to integrate with TLS libraries other than OpenSSL for other
  reasons, such as maintenance burden versus a system-provided implementation,
  or because OpenSSL is simply too large and unwieldy for their platform (e.g.
  for embedded Python). Those users are left with the requirement to use
  third-party networking libraries that can interact with their preferred TLS
  library or to shim their preferred library into the OpenSSL-specific
  :mod:`ssl` module API.

Additionally, the :mod:`ssl` module as implemented today limits the ability of
CPython itself to add support for alternative TLS implementations, or remove
OpenSSL support entirely, should either of these become necessary or useful. The
:mod:`ssl` module exposes too many OpenSSL-specific function calls and features
to easily map to an alternative TLS implementation.

> Proposal

Reviewer 3: The PEP never says where all the proposed new classes will live. Are you adding a new standard library module? If so, what is it called?

Reviewer 4: Good catch. The proof-of-concept PyPI package is `tlslib` (https://pypi.org/project/tlslib/), while Alex Gaynor and Tom Prince also reserved `tls` a decade ago (to prevent it from being used for malicious purposes). That means both of those are available as viable names for the stdlib interface.

My recommendation would be to use `tls`, so `tlslib` can remain on PyPI as a backport module for any future enhancements to the interface.

provide TLS functionality that is not so strongly tied to OpenSSL. It also
proposes to update standard library modules to use only the interface exposed by
these protocol classes wherever possible. There are three goals here:

1. To provide a common API surface for both core and third-party developers to
   target their TLS implementations to. This allows TLS developers to provide
   interfaces that can be used by most Python code, and allows network
   developers to have an interface that they can target that will work with a
   wide range of TLS implementations.

1. To provide an API that has few or no OpenSSL-specific concepts leak through.
   The :mod:`ssl` module today has a number of warts caused by leaking OpenSSL
   concepts through to the API: the new protocol classes would remove those
   specific concepts.

1. To provide a path for the core development team to make OpenSSL one of many
   possible TLS implementations, rather than requiring that it be present on a
   system in order for Python to have TLS support.

The proposed interface is laid out below.

Interfaces
----------

There are several interfaces that require standardization. Those interfaces are:

> 1. Configuring TLS, currently implemented by the :class:`~ssl.SSLContext` class

Reviewer 4: Given the back references from the text below, it's likely clearer to use explicit bullet point numbering on this list, rather than relying on the ReST auto-numbering.

and managing configuration and the responsibility for using that configuration
to build buffers or sockets.

This is necessary primarily for supporting functionality like Server Name
Indication (SNI). In OpenSSL (and thus in the :mod:`ssl` module), the server has
the ability to modify the TLS configuration in response to the client telling
the server what hostname it is trying to reach. This is mostly used to change
the certificate chain so as to present the correct TLS certificate chain for the
given hostname. The specific mechanism by which this is done is by returning a
new :class:`~ssl.SSLContext` object with the appropriate configuration as part
of a user-provided SNI callback function.

This is not a model that maps well to other TLS implementations, and puts a
burden on users to write callback functions. Instead, we propose that the
concrete implementations handle SNI transparently for every user after receiving
the relevant certificates.

For this reason, we split the responsibility of :class:`~ssl.SSLContext` into
two separate objects, which are each split into server and client versions. The
``TLSServerConfiguration`` and ``TLSClientConfiguration`` objects act as

> containers for a TLS configuration: the ClientContext and ServerContext objects

Reviewer 4: Missing backticks on the context type names.

ciphers, e.g. ``mod_nss``.

Proposed Interface
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The proposed interface for the new module is influenced by the combined set of
limitations of the above implementations. Specifically, as every implementation
except OpenSSL requires that each individual cipher be provided, there is no
option but to provide that lowest-common denominator approach.

The simplest approach is to provide an enumerated type that includes a large
subset of the cipher suites defined for TLS. The values of the enum members will
be their two-octet cipher identifier as used in the TLS handshake, stored as a
16 bit integer. The names of the enum members will be their IANA-registered
cipher suite names.

As of now, the `IANA cipher suite registry
<https://www.iana.org/assignments/tls-parameters/tls-parameters.xhtml#tls-parameters-4>`_
contains over 320 cipher suites. A large portion of the cipher suites are
irrelevant for TLS connections to network services. Other suites specify
deprecated and insecure algorithms that are no longer provided by recent
versions of implementations. The enum contains the five fixed cipher suites

> defined for TLS v1.3, and for TLS v1.2, it only contains the cipher suites that

Reviewer 3: This sentence goes on for too long, I think it is clearer to split it here.
```suggestion
defined for TLS v1.3. For TLS v1.2, it only contains the cipher suites that
```

        layer (e.g. HTTP/1.1 and HTTP/2) is not vulnerable to this kind of
        attack and so can ignore this exception.
        """

    class ConfigurationError(TLSError):
        """An special exception that implementations can use when the provided
        configuration uses features not supported by that implementation."""

Certificates
~~~~~~~~~~~~

This module would define a concrete certificate class. This class would have
almost no behavior, as the goal of this module is not to provide all possible
relevant cryptographic functionality that could be provided by X.509
certificates. Instead, all we need is the ability to signal the source of a
certificate to a concrete implementation.

For that reason, this certificate class defines three attributes, corresponding
to the three envisioned constructors: certificates from files, certificates from
memory, or certificates from arbitrary identifiers. It is possible that
implementations do not support all of these constructors, and they can
communicate this to users as described in the “Runtime” section below.
Certificates from arbitrary identifiers, in particular, are expected to be

> useful primarily to users seeking to build integrations on top of HSMs, TPMs,

Reviewer 3: These abbreviations are never defined.

Reviewer 4: The "expand the first use" style should be sufficient for these two (`hardware security modules (HSMs), trusted platform modules (TPMs),` if these are actually the first use)

SSMs, and similar.

Specifically, this class does not parse any provided input to validate that it
is a correct certificate, and also does not provide any form of introspection
into a particular certificate. TLS implementations are not required to provide
such introspection either. Peer certificates that are received during the
handshake are provided as raw DER bytes.

.. code-block:: python

    class Certificate:
        """Object representing a certificate used in TLS."""

        __slots__ = (
            "_buffer",
            "_path",
            "_id",
        )

        def __init__(

>             self, buffer: bytes | None = None, path: os.PathLike | None = None, id: bytes | None = None

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
            self, buffer: bytes | None = None, path: os.PathLike[str] | None = None, id: bytes | None = None
```

Reviewer 3: Type checkers will be unhappy if you don't provide the type argument. I guess bytes paths could be used here but in general you'd want str paths.

        ):
            """
            Creates a Certificate object from a path, buffer, or ID.

>             If none of these is given, an exception is raised.

Reviewer 3: What does it mean if more than one is given? Is that meaningful?

An alternative design could be a single base class with three concrete child classes corresponding to the three variants.

            """

            if buffer is None and path is None and id is None:
                raise ValueError("Certificate cannot be empty.")

            self._buffer = buffer
            self._path = path
            self._id = id

        @classmethod
        def from_buffer(cls, buffer: bytes) -> Certificate:
            """
            Creates a Certificate object from a byte buffer. This byte buffer
            may be either PEM-encoded or DER-encoded. If the buffer is PEM
            encoded it *must* begin with the standard PEM preamble (a series of
            dashes followed by the ASCII bytes "BEGIN CERTIFICATE" and another
            series of dashes). In the absence of that preamble, the
            implementation may assume that the certificate is DER-encoded
            instead.
            """
            return cls(buffer=buffer)

        @classmethod

>         def from_file(cls, path: os.PathLike) -> Certificate:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
        def from_file(cls, path: os.PathLike[str]) -> Certificate:
```

PEP: 748
Title: A Unified TLS API for Python
Author: Joop van de Pol <joop.vandepol@trailofbits.com>,
        William Woodruff <william@yossarian.net>
Sponsor: Alyssa Coghlan <ncoghlan@gmail.com>

> Discussions-To: https://discuss.python.org/t/pre-pep-discussion-revival-of-pep-543/51263

Reviewer: When this ready, please open a new discussion and list it here.

You can either open the discussion just before merge and add it here, or remove this line for merge, then open the discussion, and open a new PR to list it here (and in the Post-History).

Status: Draft
Type: Standards Track
Created: 27-Jun-2024

> Python-Version: 3.13

Reviewer: 3.13 is in beta = feature freeze, so new features need to target 3.14.

```suggestion
Python-Version: 3.14
```

Post-History: `17-Apr-2024 <https://discuss.python.org/t/pre-pep-discussion-revival-of-pep-543/51263>`__

> Replaces: 543

Reviewer: We give PEP 543 a `Superseded-By` header pointing to 748.

https://peps.python.org/pep-0001/#pep-header-preamble

Author: Done, thank you!

  deprecated linking against the system OpenSSL library, and even if they had
  not, that library version has been unsupported by upstream for nearly one year
  as of the time of writing. The CPython development team has started shipping
  newer OpenSSLs with the Python available from python.org, but this has the
  same problem as with Windows.

* Users may wish to integrate with TLS libraries other than OpenSSL for other
  reasons, such as maintenance burden versus a system-provided implementation,
  or because OpenSSL is simply too large and unwieldy for their platform (e.g.
  for embedded Python). Those users are left with the requirement to use
  third-party networking libraries that can interact with their preferred TLS
  library or to shim their preferred library into the OpenSSL-specific
  :mod:`ssl` module API.

Additionally, the ssl module as implemented today limits the ability of CPython
itself to add support for alternative TLS backends, or remove OpenSSL support
entirely, should either of these become necessary or useful. The :mod:`ssl`
module exposes too many OpenSSL-specific function calls and features to easily
map to an alternative TLS backend.

Proposal
========

> This PEP proposes to introduce a few new Protocol Classes in Python 3.13 to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This PEP proposes to introduce a few new Protocol Classes in Python 3.14 to
```

providing the ``server_hostname`` parameter to
:meth:`~ssl.SSLContext.wrap_socket`, but because there is only one context class
that parameter is still available), and ensures that implementations know as
early as possible which side of a TLS connection they will serve. Additionally,
it allows implementations to opt-out of one or either side of the connection.

As much as possible implementers should aim to make these classes immutable:
that is, they should prefer not to allow users to mutate their internal state
directly, instead preferring to create new contexts from new TLSConfiguration
objects. Obviously, the protocol classes cannot enforce this constraint, and so
they do not attempt to.

The ``ClientContext`` protocol class has the following class definition:

.. code-block:: python

    TODO fill ClientContext from tlslib

The ``ServerContext`` is similar, taking a ``TLSServerConfiguration`` instead.

Socket
~~~~~~

The context can be used to create sockets, which have to follow the
specification of the ``TLSSocket`` protocol class. Specifically, backends need to
implement the following:

* ``recv`` and ``send``

> * ``listen`` and ``accept``

Reviewer 5: I think it should probably raise a generic error, as I'm not aware of situations where a TLS client would be waiting for a TLS server to make the connection. The current MVP does not handle this properly, so I should fix that.

suites that match this criterion, even if they would otherwise be included:
“!MD5” means that no cipher suites using the MD5 hash algorithm should be
included), “-” (exclude matching ciphers if they were already included, but
allow them to be re-added later if they get included again), and “+” (include
the matching ciphers, but place them at the end of the list), and you get an
extremely complex format to parse. On top of this complexity it should be noted
that the actual result depends on the OpenSSL version, as an OpenSSL cipher
string is valid so long as it contains at least one cipher that OpenSSL
recognizes.

OpenSSL also uses different names for its ciphers than the names used in the
relevant specifications. See the manual page for ``ciphers(1)`` for more details.

The actual API inside OpenSSL for the cipher string is simple:

.. code-block:: c

    char *cipher_list = <some cipher list>;
    int rc = SSL_CTX_set_cipher_list(context, cipher_list);

This means that any format that is used by this module must be able to be
converted to an OpenSSL cipher string for use with OpenSSL.

Network Framework
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Network Framework is the macOS system TLS library. This library is substantially

Reviewer 6: It's worth noting that:
1. [According to Apple's docs](https://developer.apple.com/documentation/network?language=objc), Network Framework is only available in macOS 10.14 or later. Not sure the extent to which macOS < 10.14 support is a consideration here.
2. Network Framework also available in iOS 12+, tvOS 12+, and watchOS 6.0+; so any macOS implementation should also work on other Apple platforms.

Author: Thanks for calling this out! This part of the PEP probably needs a bit more clarification -- these TLS implementations are listed for evaluative purposes, not necessarily to commit CPython to supporting each one as a backend directly. 

(I'll add language around both the minimum macOS and to emphasize this.)

except OpenSSL requires that each individual cipher be provided, there is no
option but to provide that lowest-common denominator approach.

The simplest approach is to provide an enumerated type that includes a large
subset of the cipher suites defined for TLS. The values of the enum members will
be their two-octet cipher identifier as used in the TLS handshake, stored as a
16 bit integer. The names of the enum members will be their IANA-registered
cipher suite names.

As of now, the `IANA cipher suite registry
<https://www.iana.org/assignments/tls-parameters/tls-parameters.xhtml#tls-parameters-4>`_
contains over 320 cipher suites. A large portion of the cipher suites are
irrelevant for TLS connections to network services. Other suites specify
deprecated and insecure algorithms that are no longer provided by recent
versions of implementations. The enum contains the five fixed cipher suites
defined for TLS v1.3, and for TLS v1.2, it only contains the cipher suites that
correspond to the TLS v1.3 cipher suites, with ECDHE key exchange (for perfect
forward secrecy) and ECDSA or RSA signatures, which are an additional ten cipher

> suites.

Reviewer 4: Likely worth explicitly stating here that libraries and applications that need interoperability with legacy ciphersuites will need to continue to use the existing OpenSSL based TLS APIs.

Reviewer 4: Or add a sentence referring to the acceptance of raw integers covered in more detail later

In addition to this enum, the interface defines a default cipher suite list for
TLS v1.2, which includes only those defined cipher suites based on AES-GCM or

> ChaCha20-Poly1305. The default cipher suite list for TLS v1.3 should just

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
ChaCha20-Poly1305. The default cipher suite list for TLS v1.3 will
```

indeed.

For SChannel there is no easy direct mapping, due to the fact that SChannel
configures ciphers, instead of cipher suites. This represents an ongoing concern
with SChannel, which is that it is very difficult to configure in a specific
manner compared to other TLS implementations.

For the purposes of this PEP, any SChannel implementation will need to determine
which ciphers to choose based on the enum members. This may be more open than
the actual cipher suite list actually wants to allow, or it may be more
restrictive, depending on the choices of the implementation. This PEP recommends
that it be more restrictive, but of course this cannot be enforced.

Finally, we expect that for most users, secure defaults will be enough. When
specifying no list of ciphers, the backends should use secure defaults (possibly
derived from system recommended settings).

Protocol Negotiation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

ALPN allows for protocol negotiation as part of the HTTP/2 handshake. While ALPN
is at a fundamental level built on top of bytestrings, string-based APIs are
frequently problematic as they allow for errors in typing that can be hard to
detect.

> For this reason, this module would define a type that protocol negotiation

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
For this reason, this module will define a type that protocol negotiation
```

    TODO errors from tlslib

Certificates
~~~~~~~~~~~~

This module would define a concrete certificate class. This class would have
almost no behavior, as the goal of this module is not to provide all possible
relevant cryptographic functionality that could be provided by X.509
certificates. Instead, all we need is the ability to signal the source of a
certificate to a concrete implementation.

For that reason, this certificate class defines three attributes, corresponding
to the three envisioned constructors: certificates from files, certificates from
memory, or certificates from arbitrary identifiers. It is possible that backends
do not support all of these constructors, and they can communicate this to users
as described in the “Runtime” section below.

Specifically, this class does not parse any provided input to validate that it
is a correct certificate, and also does not provide any form of introspection
into a particular certificate. Backends are not required to provide such
introspection either. Peer certificates that are received during the handshake
are provided as raw DER bytes.

Future versions of the API may provide alternative constructors, e.g. to load

> certificates from HSMs, if a common interface emerges for doing this.

Reviewer 4: I suspect the "ID" interface will be enough to support HSMs (they generally have flat lists of keys and certs and refer to them by index)

Other readers may not know that though, so may get the impression this design wouldn't be usable with HSMs/TPMs/SSMs yet

in the case of client authentication or none otherwise. A server can have a
sequence of signing chains, which is useful when it is responsible for multiple
domains.

Trust Store
~~~~~~~~~~~

As discussed above, loading a trust store represents an issue because different
TLS implementations vary wildly in how they allow users to select trust stores.
For this reason, we need to provide a model that assumes very little about the
form that trust stores take.

This problem is the same as the one that the ``Certificate`` and ``PrivateKey``
types need to solve. For this reason, we use the exact same model, by creating a
concrete class that captures the various means of how users could define a trust
store.

A given TLS implementation is not required to handle all possible trust stores.
However, it is strongly recommended that a given TLS implementation handles the
``system`` constructor if at all possible, as this is the most common validation
trust store that is used. Backends can communicate unsupported options as
described in the “Runtime” section below.

.. code-block:: python

    TODO TrustStore from tlslib

Runtime Access
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> A not-uncommon use case for library users is to want to allow the library to

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
A not-uncommon use case is for library users to want to specify the TLS backend to use while allowing the library to configure the details of the actual TLS connection. 
```

(no multiline comments in the mobile web view, this suggestion is to replace the entire first sentence)

  or trust stores (e.g. from arbitrary identifiers)?

* Get the correct types for the two context classes?

Constructing certificate and trust store objects should be possible outside of
the backend. Therefore, the backends need to provide a way for users to verify
whether the backend is compatible with user-constructed certificates and trust
stores. Therefore, each backend should implement a ``validate_config`` method
that takes a ``TLSClientConfiguration`` or ``TLSServerConfiguration`` object and
raises an exception if unsupported constructors were used.

For the types, there are two options: either all concrete implementations can be
required to fit into a specific naming scheme, or we can provide an API that
makes it possible to grab these objects.

This PEP proposes that we use the second approach. This grants the greatest
freedom to concrete implementations to structure their code as they see fit,
requiring only that they provide a single object that has the appropriate
properties in place. Users can then pass this “backend” object to libraries that
support it, and those libraries can take care of configuring and using the
concrete implementation.

> All concrete implementations must provide a method of obtaining a ``Backend``

Reviewer 4: Perhaps TLSImplementation rather than Backend?

At the very least, the TLS prefix should be used here.

Author: `TLSImplementation` makes sense to me!

migrating to the protocol classes presented here would potentially cause the
exceptions defined above to be thrown instead, and existing ``except`` blocks
will not catch them.

For this reason, part of the migration of the :mod:`ssl` module would require
that the exceptions in the :mod:`ssl` module alias those defined above. That is,
they would require the following statements to all succeed:

.. code-block:: python

    assert ssl.SSLError is tls.TLSError
    assert ssl.SSLWantReadError is tls.WantReadError
    assert ssl.SSLWantWriteError is tls.WantWriteError

The exact mechanics of how this will be done are beyond the scope of this PEP,
as they are made more complex due to the fact that the current ssl exceptions
are defined in C code, but more details can be found in `an email sent to the
Security-SIG by Christian Heimes
<https://mail.python.org/pipermail/security-sig/2017-January/000213.html>`_.

Future
======

Major future TLS features may require revisions of these protocol classes. These
revisions should be made cautiously: many backends may not be able to move
forward swiftly, and will be invalidated by changes in these protocol classes.

> This is acceptable, but wherever possible features that are specific to

Reviewer 4: This sentence is odd. This new module would be expected to follow the same compatibility rules as the rest of the standard library (the existing SSL module exception for updating to more secure defaults over time would apply)

Author: Agreed; I think we took this verbatim from PEP 543, so this entire "future" section probably needs to be reworked.
